.. _requirements:

Requirements and Quickstart
===========================

Hardware and Platform
---------------------

``Streamcenter+`` consists of a native CUDA FTLE solver together with a native
Qt/VTK desktop GUI.

The minimum practical requirements are listed as follows:

* At least 4 GB of system memory and about 10 GB of free disk space.
* A 64-bit Windows or Linux environment. The shipped install scripts currently target
  Windows and Debian/Ubuntu-style Linux systems with ``apt``.
* An NVIDIA GPU together with a locally installed CUDA Toolkit for the solver.

The solver configures ``CMAKE_CUDA_ARCHITECTURES=native`` by default, so the build
machine is expected to have a visible local NVIDIA CUDA environment.

GPU memory capacity is usually the main bottleneck for large FTLE jobs.
A practical rule of thumb is to keep
:math:`N_x \times N_y \times N_z \times N_t`
below roughly 200,000,000 Lagrangian particles per GiB of VRAM for the default
double-sided still workflow, and lower than that for higher-order settings.


Environment
-----------

The repository provides platform-specific installation scripts that prepare the
CMake/CUDA/Qt/VTK toolchain directly.

On Windows, ``install.cmd`` and ``install.ps1`` provision the following dependencies:

* ``Git``
* ``CMake``
* ``Ninja``
* ``Visual Studio Build Tools 2022``
* ``NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit``
* ``FFmpeg`` for MP4 export
* a local ``vcpkg`` tree that installs ``Qt6`` and ``VTK``

The default Windows dependency cache uses the ``x64-windows-release`` triplet, which
avoids building both Debug and Release variants of ``Qt`` and ``VTK`` during the first
install.
If Debug libraries are also needed, rerun the installer with
``-VcpkgTriplet x64-windows``.

On Debian/Ubuntu-style Linux systems, ``install.sh`` installs the following packages:

* ``build-essential``
* ``cmake``
* ``ninja-build``
* ``git``
* ``pkg-config``
* ``qt6-base-dev``
* ``qt6-base-dev-tools``
* ``qt6-tools-dev``
* ``libvtk9-dev``
* ``libvtk9-qt-dev``
* ``ffmpeg`` by default
* ``nvidia-cuda-toolkit`` by default

When ``nvcc`` is found on Linux, the installer also records
``STREAMCENTERPLUS_CUDA_ROOT`` under
``~/.config/streamcenterplus/env.sh`` for later builds.


Environment Overrides
---------------------

If your toolchain is installed outside the default locations, the build scripts
understand the following environment variables:

* ``STREAMCENTERPLUS_VCPKG_ROOT``
* ``STREAMCENTERPLUS_VCPKG_TRIPLET``
* ``STREAMCENTERPLUS_QT_ROOT``
* ``STREAMCENTERPLUS_VTK_ROOT``
* ``STREAMCENTERPLUS_CUDA_ROOT``

Add-on Tools
------------

* **ParaView**
  ParaView remains a convenient external viewer for inspecting ``.vts`` and ``.pvd``
  outputs generated by the native solver.
  It is optional, because the native GUI already provides an embedded VTK viewer, but
  it is still useful for post-processing and larger inspection tasks.

* **FFmpeg**
  ``ffmpeg`` is required if you want to export MP4 animations from the GUI.
  It is optional for plain solving, parameter editing, and static visualization.

* **PowerShell on Linux**
  ``pwsh`` is optional on Linux.
  It is only needed if you want to use the same ``run.ps1`` wrappers shipped for the
  Windows workflow. Otherwise the built GUI or solver binaries can be launched directly
  from their build folders.


Quickstart
----------

The steps below follow the current repository layout.
They use the top-level install and build entry points and then launch the GUI or solver
through the maintained wrapper scripts.

Windows
~~~~~~~

Install the required toolchain and cache the GUI dependencies:

.. code-block:: powershell

   .\install.cmd

If you need advanced flags, call the PowerShell entry directly instead:

.. code-block:: powershell

   .\install.ps1

If Debug variants of ``Qt`` and ``VTK`` are needed as well, use:

.. code-block:: powershell

   .\install.ps1 -VcpkgTriplet x64-windows

Build both the native CUDA solver and the native GUI:

.. code-block:: powershell

   .\build.ps1 -NonInteractive

Run the GUI:

.. code-block:: powershell

   .\GUI\V2603\run.ps1

Optionally run the bundled solver smoke test directly:

.. code-block:: powershell

   .\CUDAsolvers\V2603\run.ps1 --par .\CUDAsolvers\V2603\tools\regression_small.par


Linux (Debian/Ubuntu)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Install the build dependencies:

.. code-block:: bash

   bash ./install.sh

Build both the solver and the GUI:

.. code-block:: bash

   bash ./build.sh --all

Run the GUI.
If PowerShell is available, the wrapper is:

.. code-block:: bash

   pwsh ./GUI/V2603/run.ps1

Otherwise, launch the generated GUI binary directly from ``GUI/V2603/build/``.

Optionally run the bundled solver smoke test.
With PowerShell:

.. code-block:: bash

   pwsh ./CUDAsolvers/V2603/run.ps1 --par ./CUDAsolvers/V2603/tools/regression_small.par

Without PowerShell, launch the built solver binary directly from
``CUDAsolvers/V2603/out/build/``.


Notes for Real Cases
--------------------

The GUI launches the native CUDA solver.

The parameter format remains ``.par``-based.
When preparing your own cases, update entries such as ``vtk_folder`` and
``output_dir`` so that they point to locations that actually exist on your machine.
The native parser reads those paths literally.
